Design Patterns for Startups

Goal:To figure out a way to recognize patterns in successful ideas, and also to recognize how a complete product leverages the connections between those patterns to create a profitable loop of consumer transactions.To want to be able to quickly evaluate an idea in terms of what’s already successful.We should accomplish these aims by:-Profiling successful companies and ideas by breaking their features into elements-Finding patterns between these elements-Applying these elements to ideas and projects of my own constructionSection 1: Types of IdeasAs of now I have identified three types of ideas that eventually become web products. I may add or change this list as my thoughts develop.Purely social ideasThese ideas are essentially a mirror of a real world interaction.Examples: 	Facebook, TwitterPros:Can be developed into every day use products with mass appeal given the correct circumstances.Cons:	Chicken and egg problem	Lack of an immediate business modelNotes:	The real world interaction that this is modeled after must be one that is performed on a frequent basis otherwise the site has a low engagement. For example, gossiping about friends, seeing what they are up to, and talking about them is a daily occurrence so a site that lets you do that (Facebook) has high engagement.Pragmatic ideas	These ideas solve problems.	Examples:		Google, Airbnb, Dropbox	Pros:Are generally utilities so they don’t suffer from a chicken and egg problem.       Many times come with a built in business model. 		Cons:		Requires unique solutions.       Can be technologically challenging.       Need lots of marketing.      Requires customer service.      More vulnerable to a competitor because your solution must stay cutting edge.		Notes:		These ideas generally answer a question, and must fulfill a preexisting need. A question for Google might be: what’s the best way to find relevant sites online?Games	These ideas create a fantasy interaction between the user and his computer (as well as possibly others).	Examples:		Zynga	Pros:		Very easy to monetize.		Can spread virally.	Cons:			High barrier to entry		Requires creation of sophisticated art and graphics		Hard to be different		There is a lot of competition	Notes:		None for the moment.Section 2: Index of ElementsFree voyeurism – voyeurism without social costSocial tagging – seeing when other people mention youFOMO – fear of missing outIP tracking – the ability to track your influence and/or popularityConstant engagement by notificationsMirror of real life interactionPersonal branding toolLow barrier networking tool – make connections outside of your physical social network.       Low cost way to meet new, relevant and interesting people.Solves different problems in connected marketsSpread by peer pressureSocial competition Simple to learn, hard to masterPromise of enhanced existenceSocial knowledgebaseSimple way to demonstrate awesomenessLimited to componentAnswers a questionHas an exclusive elementSection 3: Company ProfilesFacebookFree voyeurismSocial taggingFOMOIP trackingConstant engagement via notificationsMirror of real life interactionSpread by peer pressureHas an exclusive elementProblems:Chicken and egg – overcome by launching in a small environment in which the creator had a good reach.TwitterSocial taggingIP trackingMirror of real life interactionFOMOConstant engagement via notificationsPersonal branding toolLow barrier networking toolProblems:Chicken and egg – solved when they blew up at SXSWNo business model – mostly because their business team sucksLots of users that never visitLow engagement for the average userGrouponSolves different problems in two connected marketsFOMOConstant user engagement via notificationsSpread by peer pressurePromise of enhanced existenceLimited time componentProblems:Sometimes too good to be trueSustainable business model?Chicken and egg but to a lesser degreeZyngaFantasy interactionFOMOConstant user engagement via notificationsSpread by peer pressure (gifting etc)Social competitionFree voyeurism (probably not an essential characteristic)Simple to learn, hard to masterPromise of enhanced existenceProblems:High barriers to entryLots of competitionHard to be differentArt/graphics creationQuoraFOMOIP trackingSocial taggingConstant user engagement via notificationsMirror to a real life interactionPersonal branding toolLow barrier networking toolPromise of enhanced existenceSocial knowledgebaseProblems:Chicken and eggQuality of responsesBusiness modelSmall core group of power usersLow engagement for the average userGoogleSolution to a problemSimple use case Simple way to demonstrate awesomenessSpread by peer pressureAnswers a question (how do you find the most relevant sites online)Problems:Solution has to be innovative and work wellMarketingFirst mover advantage is big unless the solution is really unique because no one has any reason to switchProcesses for Finding IdeasDon’t start with elements, evaluate with elements.When you look at elements you can see how each company blends them differently and each fits into its own specific space. Impossible to see the spaces between: (via Hume).Get inspired and then start “elementizing.”Ask questionsTransplant examples from other parts of the world and from other industries